so it is 7 o' and we'll call the public
hearing to
order
and any want to
speak it's 7
o a question okay changing the dates on
the town budget meeting that would now
allow us to have a single date to both
the town
the reference on one day instead
of yes they didn't see that mention
in thank you
[Music]
um I have number of comments here
from from the chapter 3 meeting section
301 I do not like the proposed changes
to the town meeting giving the board of
selected the legislative Authority for
almost all matters is taking away the
voice of the people of Andover the
provisions for the electors to repeal
any ordinance enacted by the board of s
and yet making the referendum wait until
the next November election I feel it's
unnecessary
as a referendum need not be
prohibitively expensive especially if
you just do handwritten um votes instead
of that machine that we use for these
major elections
um sections 303 and 803 the town meeting
the annual Town budget meeting I would
only want to see the date moved up the
last week of April instead of three
weeks or two three weeks earlier all
steps involved in preparing the town
budget only need to be moved by one week
not completely reworked it looks like it
completely working the whole budget
which system which I don't think is
necessary uh section 304 special Tor
meetings
304d this section about the creation
consolidation
modification uh abolition of boards
Commission Etc I don't feel should be
eliminated I think that should still be
there that special Town meetings do this
um section 304 G grants when discussing
grants I realized that the
amount it was very very
low um I don't think local Board of
Education should be included in this it
said
that Board of Education when be involved
with this be by State Statute the board
of education is independent of the town
when it comes to their
grants um in chapter four The Board
select in section
401 um I asked what happened to the
question of increasing the number of
Selectmen from 5 to
seven it was deferred to a later meeting
at the June 4th meeting it was mentioned
and they said well we'll defer this and
hold it till but it's never mentioned
again I think that increasing the number
of SEL would be a good
idea um section 402 the general powers
and duties of the board
selecting I think that there's too much
power given to just the board of
Selectmen I mean I know I'm on the board
of Selectmen but I still feel like we
should have a town meeting the people of
the Town voting and not taking that away
from the people
um chapter 7 the administrative officers
section 701 General I believe that the
town court position should remain an
elected
position it has worked in the past and
there's no reason why I can't continue
to work that
way and chapter 10 the transition and
miscellaneous provision section
108 I do agree with giving any future
Charter of revision commission a minimum
of 6 months to subit your draft report I
think you've been rushed it this looks
like you've been cramming the meetings
in trying to get it done the last minute
that that's provision of the
depart so I have it all typed out I can
give it to somebody who
is really in
just right okay
so not that you're supposed to
respond
com is is
perfectly okay
well it's it may it may be reasonable
but I've always question people not to
respond okay for B
care that's the way it's done everywhere
I've been
involved okay I mean can't want I mean
there
nothing we're all friends here okay
there's there's just a couple and as far
as moving the vote and the dates of we
would have to move the annual Town
budget meeting to that second week in
April because this gives us a two week
period to be on with ram which is that
vote is the Tuesday following the first
Monday of May that statuto cannot change
so that's why these dates are specific
where Board of Finance has to have their
public hearing at first week of April
our annual Town budget meeting is the
second week of April and it
automatically goes to referendum on the
Tuesday following the first Monday in
May so that's why that date is pushed up
and everything is just pushed up really
by about 30
days the goal the goal was to have one
ref for the next wall not two that's all
that but my comment was this because the
ram budget was just that vot a week
before
ours so why do we have to change it by
more than a
week doesn't make
sense time for people to get the noce
out in the mail that the so we still
have to get the notices out this gives
everybody two weeks to apply for an
absentee ballot if they're not going to
be there on that day
so and then just just so and I only want
to respond to one other issue you
brought is that we did change to not
wait to just remember we said that if
there was a an ordinance that the board
selectman wanted to pass and it got
petitioned it would go to
either May referendum or the November
ref so not just November but what you
mean like the budget
referend so whatever would be the next
scheduled event that we have rather than
SCH special ref for
that I the whole goal is to
not more com and have more days where we
don't have more participation so more
participation not less participation
because in our town meetings in our town
meetings
honestly we a 50 people at those time
meetings and and the goal would be to
send it to referendum to get more
participation to allow more people to be
able to vote on all these issues so that
that's it don't see
that it seems to me like it's just
not it's taking away the voice of the
people because they can't come out to a
town meeting this we've had the town
meeting in Handover for many years 100
years probably or more we're still a
small town I can't see
changing my
voice anyone else yes I I'd like to do
two things one is Shan L can't be here
tonight because a conflict asked if I
would read her letter um and I've got
copies for for all of you and I can I
can forward it electronically if you
want to she asked that this be read into
the record which I asse need ends up on
the minutes somehow
attachment to minutes I've got one on my
own so I may be a few minutes if that's
okay yeah okay so shanon's letter um I'm
not even try to do the Shannon voice
um and I'm not going to read word for
word a lot of it overlaps um with what
an just said and mine does too you were
all independent for I know yeah at least
mine was independent the other two um
she says thank you for all the work you
you do and have done to improve the
charter concerned of the following Pro
proposed amendments to the Chart I do
not agree that the position of town
clerk should be appointed by the board
of selectman instead of elected by the
citizens of hand over an appointed town
clerk creates a possibility that if
three members of the board of Selectmen
had some disagreement with the town
clerk those three Selectmen could choose
not to reappoint that town clerk a vote
by of citizens does not allow such a
precious result even more troubling
about the proposed amendment to the
Charter in this regard is that the
appointment of the critical position of
the town clerk would be left to a newly
elected bard selectman which is likely
to include one or more selectman with
little or no Knowledge from which to
make the best informed decision about
the town Town's position should
remaining left your second pointen uh a
typ off I'll just give you the paper
with that stuff on it um the third by
far our biggest one is about the uh you
do not believe there's any need for
legislative Authority in the town to
change the town we need to join
Authority the board of Select I believe
that such a change is not in the best
interest of you uh first in my more than
20 years in Andover I do not recall a
single matter it was of such emergency
nature that it was not adequately
addressed by a town meeting in section
406 of the charter already provides for
emergency ordinances many references
during the commission's meeting have
been made to the to to the need made to
the need to address people's violation
of the no dog policy on the Town
Memorial Field and mide drive and the
Wast that dogs leave on the field if a
minor ordinance does not already exist
in the 79 pages of ordinances on the
town website to address a specific issue
it can quickly be addressed by the board
of selectman's authority to act enact
minor
ordinances given that no dog sign to
located around the field it may simply
be a matter of enforcement instead of a
need for more legislation second I do
not believe that it was in the best for
the town that the board of Select would
become the both the legislative body and
the board responsible for the town's
budget because there is need to be
separation of powers between the person
trains in the policy creation third well
I appreciate first s inquires the we
that if a given legislative Authority by
amending the charter the B of s would
not promate unreasonably unreasonable
legislation I do not believe that the
onus or determining the unreasonable
should shift to 50 and citizens to be
required to quickly petition to repeal
such legislative act why I S keep the
town meeting as a legislative body
instead of requiring 50 citizens to
petition to repeal whatever the board of
Selectmen and ask citizens don't um I'm
going to skip the rest that she goes on
that she says that in her time I know
she never felt like to too many count
meetings was a problem
um and she suggests if if you really
think this it should have more
legislative Authority a compromise might
be that you know in the spring and the
fall election the board of Select propos
ordinances to go to um go to the town
meeting um there's another type all
mention in there uh she says she I
believe that the proposed changes to
section 803 need to be further amended
to provide for the town's budget uh it's
possibly amended by a town meeting for
such only to provide
to to referend I'm sorry should have
read this over before I came um it have
been approved by majority of the voters
as currently proposed doesn't seem to be
a description of this requirement um and
she asked what the mechanism is for
addressing the town budget if the Region
8 Board of Education buzet doesn't pass
um if i' had seen this with enough time
I think I would told her the answer to
that
but from the Ram Board point of view um
if the Propst changes to three the
propos changeing 3 or four F in the
proposed Chang I do not believe that a
special town meeting has oversight to
require votes to allow this local and
the Board of Education to participate in
any federal state or private grant
program um I'm going to address the same
in my point I'm going to skip the rest
of that um finally I believe it is
critical to allow and numers voters
on the ballot this November to vote on
each separate proposed amendment to the
Charter and um the board of Select
proposes
be so that's Shannon's letter if you
want to respond to that that's fine but
she's not here to actually speak for
herself mine covers much the same point
so can I have a copy of that yeah I'm
going to bring it right now just I'll
give you a copies of M as well actually
anybody here want I should ask before we
long yeah you
um so that
shs
I I do much the same thing in my letters
I guess about the same number of words
of P half a page longer um
so I start with the same thing thank you
for all the work you're doing here you
have crammed in a lot in a short time
I'm impressive
um I'm also concerned by that um this
has been very hurried um that we should
have this in front of the voters before
our presidential election sounds a
little more like an excuse if we really
wanted that why didn't we start it
earlier um doesn't doesn't seem like a a
strong reason for for speeding this up
so much um my big concern is that as far
as I can tell none of these changes were
available to see to look at before
Monday I looked on the website Friday
and Saturday I think and it was nothing
there Monday I finally saw this document
with the proposed changes managed to
read through it
on I just want to
know did um the Delta um the document
with the changes to the U here this is
okay this is
sh thanks yeah um mine afterwards um
want to read
along I
have okay
yeah I'm not read
that
one Shan's this is mine you got Shan is
there oh okay yeah okay can I see what
the doc you're referring to I'm talking
about the uh um the one direct report
not not the short one just the changes
but the the full document of the changes
the full Charter of the changes mixed in
um the other one was on an attachment to
the most recent unes it was just the
Deltas but not the the full full Charter
this this is much easier to read and
understand fall
um so yeah I I was concerned by that you
know the Public's chance to react is
right now and that's pretty short from
when this 30 or 40 50 Pati whatever it
is thought was made available on Monday
um all right
so I've got a bunch of notes there um
first one is a bunch of more technical
things either typos or like this thing
that's in the section on definitions is
in the definition it belongs somewhere
else if anywhere
um the election dates are obvious yes no
big deal um I could luckily go along if
um mam Vice chair mayor was promoting
the idea of a elected an appointed Town
CL but I don't like the idea in general
um the 23d now now I got my notes but
not the document FR me but um oh yeah
why why why newly elected roles start so
soon it it seems it seems fast to me
seems to me that there should be little
transition period why not January 1st or
something like that um it's some these
are minor concerns
um and the I'll talk about and Below on
the the
whole changing the legislative
Authority something there's something
about effective dates uh 45 days out how
does that
affect an ordinance that says as of
October 1st um you know I just don't
know how it's it's a question not really
concern but you know I don't know that
we haveen like that but I tend to see a
lot of
Provisions passed in general say that's
such such a date now we say this going
to take place take effect 45 days from
whatever it's it's just a weird
connection
um and if if we need that 45 days if we
need it done that soon then why when
they fail do we send it out for six
months um seems to me that that at that
point if they're important enough to do
in 45 days then we should um probably
have special referendum but not
important enough they can be scheduled
that far in general you know if they're
you know we want to change this but it's
not urgent I I don't see a problem with
that
um the 301g I'm I'll talk about
fall um just technical things why do we
have a specific date um October 15th in
you know one section the very next
section 150 days before the end of the
fiscal year can't they both be the same
style you you know both say October 15th
and whatever 150 days before that date
is rather than combining the two in the
document again that's that's my um
there's a typ all between 803c and 803
802 802 802c and 82 D just the word Year
got shifted pretty clearly got shifted
from one place to another
um we something was for 85 days which
struck me as an unusual number but it
may be the same kind of thing car was
talking about there about it just have
to be so far behind but after this and
85 might be requir if it's not 90 days
seems a much more logal
number um you know just 85 is weird um
we're all used to things measured in 90
days 30 days 60 days 90 days 120
whatever
um 805b I'm just going to leave you for
you to read the Tex is um quite
confusing
um there's uh
I I'm wondering if there's any legal
requirement that we have figures and
dollar figures down to the penny in here
200,000 if that's required if not easier
to read without no it's not okay
um and in that same a5b we use the
budget as approved by the board of
Finance shouldn't that be approved at
referendum and that is that is the final
Authority on the budget um so it get
approved by the board of finance and
rejected by the voters does how does
that react how does that interfere here
how does that interact what
um and yes um like Ann said the minimum
six months for the charter is a very
good idea I can imagine why it's put in
there so the commentary is L us into um
three things here one is the legislative
Authority I don't see the need um we we
don't have emergencies in town that
require that if we do we have authority
to act um and if not it's you know
what's it 7 days or 14 days for a
announcement of public
meeting but it's not it's five days
there only five days it's really not
that hard a real emergency we're going
to deal with no matter what um and if
it's not to cover some real problems
we've had but it's only through the
convenience of the board of Select
another town manager
then you know what democracy messy
democracy can be slow um but democracy
Al also a very good thing to have and
our little New England Town democracies
are one of the few real remaining
spright democracies there are I think
it's good to keep um losing it just
because things are a little slow without
Strat um and I'm especially bothered by
the the process for Ling for overturning
uh an ordinance um I think the the idea
that well not enough people come out to
vote then oh they must have meant it
they wanted it it's it's basically how
it reads I no people don't turn out to
vote then then we probably shouldn't be
passing ordinance
um uh I have the same concern um both
Sharon shanon and an um expressed about
the T town clerk's position
um I'm not going to read it but it's
it's the same thing I think that it's
worked well for us in the 25 years I've
been town of course we' have the same
town clerk for those 25 years we had
other ones prior to that yeah of course
we could so elected yeah and I I think
I've got to say Carol has done a
fantastic job in that um so if she is
interested in that and she's for it I'm
I'm fine with it but I would rather not
see this in general General thing um and
the same concern about the Board of
Education grants um I've got the book on
uh Connecticut education law and I
haven't been able to read everything
related to that in the two days since
this came out but I'm pretty sure that
this is actually illegal that we cannot
do that the board of education is
responsible for that and there is no
external oversight uh Board of finance
of course can say well we're not going
to uh you know we're not going to agree
to that budget the town can obviously
reject the budget but we can't
micromanage much of any of it that
includes the grant process I may be
wrong I hav't finished all that material
but
it's the book is not Fick and it's not
all in one place um so that's it I there
was supposed to be a final fent on here
but I wrote this in a
um but thank you very much for the work
you guys have been doing I do disagree
with some of the major concerns though
and um one thing I didn't mention I
didn't read is uh I am concerned about
how needs will be presented how many
different um yes no roles that that
we're going to have but if they're not
sever enough um I will have to argue
hard against this this chart because I
think some of these points are really
bad some of them are you know pretty
necessary there change the dates and all
that um I think so I'm hoping that this
is broken down into lot of small pieces
if it's not changed before tonight's
meeting so that's it sorry for being
very
longwinded me to email those be easier
if I emailed you copies of
those this is good thank
you anyone else let's see uh I just
wanted to um say that
I would think that something of this
importance would we would get a mailer
and I don't know if I didn't get one
that was sent out but uh just happened
to notice in the River East which I
don't always look at it but that there
was a
meeting was it 15
Monday and
then uh it to a friend who told me that
there was public speak today so it's
kind of like I just happened to know
about this and I feel like Charter
revision should be you know there should
be a notice sent out in the mail that
there's going to be changes and this is
your opportunity to
speak um the other thing is I hav't
really put a lot of thought into this
but I did see part of the meeting
talking about the um town clerk
you know going
from uh an elect an elected official to
appointed and you know a good point was
made that um an appointed official would
be somebody you could draw from a larger
crowd you know like say someone from
Simsbury or whatever some other Town
never even heard of Andover they
wouldn't come you know to try to be
elected cuz who would elect somebody who
you never heard of before you could
probably find some very qualified people
um and Carol you've done a wonderful job
and and yes it's work for 25 years but
just because it's work for 25 years
doesn't mean it's going to continue you
know things change World changes
sometimes we have to change and uh if
other towns are doing it other ways it
might be good to you know see how
they're doing
it that's just my thought
if I I had a quick followup to something
it's in my letter an important point was
one of the things about this speed this
process uh is I spoke to another
volunteer for this who never got
notified never never learned that she
wasn't chosen nobody notified her when I
mentioned something about that last week
she said oh yeah when's that
started it's
something went on there um and and that
bothers
me Dennis well I like to clarify a few
things in terms of the process
of and in other the the process this is
just a one part of process after this
after this process is completed and the
um the the commission comes up with the
final report it goes to the board of
Select there will be public hearing
there Board of Select will decide what
to send to the voters in November if
they do it in November I can tell you
this though if it if it if it's sent to
the voters anytime other than a general
election it will fail it will fail
there's no way I've never seen a Char
pass that wasn't with uh other things on
the B because you won't get the turnout
for it and uh so anybody
who does this kind of thing any town
does this thing usually does it in
November if there are elections in
November whether it be you know the
local election or the or the uh state
election the
presidential because the uh you have to
get a certain number of people to turn
out certain number of people to vote Yes
and it's not uh it's larg but not doable
as
a you know just like you talked about
the town meetings Scott and town
meetings are attended by a very small
percentage of the population I'm all for
democracy too uh perhaps as much as you
maybe even more but uh I like the idea
in situations like this of
representative democracy and the
question is is whether it's Endo big
enough for representative democracy or
is a town meeting type movement type
town meeting uh in this day and age when
people are stay at home watch television
I know the younger crowd do CU I have
grandchildren they they don't go
anywhere I can't even get out throw a
ball around and they're good athletes
but um getting people out for Town
meetings I mean you might get the same
crowd all the time so that so what that
amounts to is that you elect your board
is selected five members um they they
campaign you know who they are you get a
chance to vote for them and the people
who come to town meetings nobody votes
for them and they're a small group
relatively small group you now have a a
minimum that we have to have I think you
have a quum of 25 so if you get 25
people together at town meeting that
group that self- selected gets the
chance to pass ores that to me is not
democracy um not quite not in a town how
many people how many voters
are 2,000 25
2500 25 people is you know that to me is
not democracy but that's that's just my
own personal opinion I'm I'm more
interested in in in talking about the
process and how it works and it's just
not this is just a a an opening stage it
is not the final stage and the board is
selecting who has more control over what
goes what goes and what doesn't go to
the voters and and qu to answer your
question about does it go in one one big
package no it's broken down into issues
and and something like this with a lot
of U you know relatively a lot of issues
into it you might get um CU I would work
on that with the with with the board
select you might get five or six
questions and that's you know sometimes
you have one as to catch all with minor
stuff in it um but no you don't it's not
it's not voted on as a a single package
and that's another way that the voters
in November I assume be turn
up know well I hope so too I hope
everybody votes I always do and and
because I'm not only been a lawyer for
50 years I've been involved in politics
for 40 years more than 40 years and um I
like uh I like elections I like elected
people being elected and in most
situations uh I was a probate judge and
I was elected and a lot of people don't
think judges should be elected but I
kind of think they should and uh the
town clerk uh that's a that could go
either way in my in my opion but you
know somebody said as you said you have
you you know if you have somebody on car
Le who is terrific and lives in town
wonderful but if you can't find somebody
who's uh who wants to do the job and who
has that capability in town awful lot of
towns including my own town I have going
to uh appointed uh uh uh Tom clerk in
fact my story is that I was the
Democratic party chair and that happened
and the person who was the Tom clerk was
a Democrat was very popular and I tried
to talk to out of it I said no no I want
you to stay in the ballot you you're a
votg and you bring you bring a lot of
people to a democratic line and she said
no I really don't want to go through the
electoral process again I said look
whatever you want I'll support I was
also the chairman Char bu commission
Carol I think whatever you want I would
support if I run this Commission but but
anyway I mean that's to me that's not a
that's not a key issue there are
advantages and disadvantages to that the
advantage being you know you get a
larger full potential evence and and as
Carol knows and as anybody who's ever
worked in the town L knows you got to
have a good time cour if you don't
you're in big trouble you're in trouble
of Plenty so uh you know that was that
issue but you brought up something you
thought was the legal was in here and I
I'm I'm very very on the U the uh
dichotomy between town government and
the Board of Education okay I've dealt
with that a lot of times including this
one and uh there's always arguments
about that because because the state
constitution gives the responsibility to
educate children to the town uh but but
but uh but the school property is owned
by the I mean to the board board of but
the school property own by the town so
you get we had this problem you remember
huh okay that was an interesting issue
you remember Tom money who came to one
of the meetings he's an old friend of
mine we worked together on I have I read
this book too and and uh I uh he came to
one of the meetings and I think he
clarifi things quite well but anyway you
said there was something in this that is
you think might be illegal and if there
is in my mind we never changed
terminology about Board of Education in
the
current change it well in my copy it
seems that it was
added Angela the local Board of
Education G now let's think that
through
um oh
excluding right so it's weird Okay so
that's that may
be exclud Carol do you have that in
years that's
204g I do have that in mind because
originally it said in excess of 2500
excluding the local and Regional Board
of Education Yes actually langage still
in there right and then the other
language below it's it's it's not only
might be it's very confusing between the
two Clauses well well that is there
certainly
confusion um we can remove that then
because I don't we can remove
yeah I don't I don't think they you know
I don't think anybody wants to uh take
away any kind of authority from the
Board of Education that is wife Board of
Education as I've said many many times
there's no stronger support of public
education anywhere than me so I don't I
don't
sh sh oh I
think I but Shan at the board meeting
today there was enough important stuff
she couldn't make this
okay but yeah if if we if we stuck that
um and the local Board of Education from
that I would have a check well it's it's
it's it's in there as an exclusion above
and then it's right and now it's added
back in so yeah I don't know how it got
in there maybe it was me maybe it was
somebody else but I I don't does anybody
have a problem with striking that well
we'll do
it okay so so just consider that okay
anybody here and I can see Jeff is
getting tired of listening to me as he
often does but I can actually talk it's
your birthday and I cannot my
birthday you can take me out of the
room but um anyway that's something to
consider for you all okay the other
thing I want to say at the outset and
I'll shut up is that yes this group took
on a lot of issues in a very short time
that was was there a choice I do not
think that was the intention uh it's a
small group it's only seven members
you're missing three members
today um everybody from my standpoint
worked very hard on this and compromised
and came up with a I think a pretty good
pretty good plan
that you know if I were local pres I
wanted to go to the voters in November
yeah most of it all of it except for
that mistake you pointed out because it
can always be rejected the peace meil
you know you know there's going be
several several questions I don't know
the you may want to revisit the town
clerk issue uh now now that it's been
raised by Scott Shannon and and
andu okay and then you had you had a
contr I'm just trying to help Jeff I
know you don't want to hear more from me
because I do have a reputation as being
uh well you remember Bill
Curry I local I local Bill Curry in with
them and they try to shut me up all the
time and nobody shuts me up than Jeff
Jeff you're not the chairman I'm just
telling you I'm not in chair you're not
the chairman she is
she so if Carol wants to shut me up I'll
show up well you have any questions for
me I will but I just want you to know
that the process is this is just the
first stage of the process the next
stage is for the selectman this gets the
report and then uh they decide what to
do if they have any differences they can
send the differences back to this group
they can get together try to iron the
differences then the board of Select is
the one is the body that decides uh how
to State on the B breaking it up with
the questions which I will try to help
Carol will try to help of course we B do
and um you know it doesn't doesn't go to
the vo as the package
all right I I I will uh I will pass to
the next speaker i' like to
say um just to followup what my comment
about the town CL was that I don't know
about you Carol but I don't think you're
going to work forever so we might have
to have another town perk at some point
so that's just my thought um and then I
remember your name but he said something
about about the town yes
I'm denn yes I got
everybody I'm
disappointed I don't know
everybody but you said something about
the town meeting that made me realize
that most the people that are at the
town meeting have a vested interest in
the outcome of the budget that we're
talking about so when you look around at
the meeting it's always
people that are there have an actual
interest in it so it's true what you're
saying that you know we're actually
allowing minority people have a large
percent a large say in what happens to
our town just based on those few people
that show up because I know as a an
individual who just tries to be um you
know on both sides I don't try to you
know be just on one side I try to look
at all sides and and just try to be a
person that's going to think about the
whole town in general anyway I've tried
to get a lot of people here people don't
come to the meetings it doesn't matter
what you say you turn you know rbe them
or whatever they just won't come unless
there's an actual interest I have said
well if I have a case of beer in my car
you would you come maybe but no I'm not
going to do that well there was a time
when I was first here
where the decisions were made by that
group it was no refer was never referred
to a referendum and it was uh deemed at
over a period of time that it was a much
much more democratic to open it to those
that could not attend or would not be
likely to attend and they needed a
bigger pool of Voters to
contribute votes to pass a budget every
year so then we went to having it passed
to referendum which is fair because
everybody gets a chance not that
everybody takes
it and most people assume that people
that went to the town meeting know what
they're talking about so they'll just
let them do the yeah but then they'll
complain over tax level on some item or
another in it and they put their opinion
in by voting
so it's the fair way were you are Town
wi when that took place or was that
before I've been to town Atty
for
20 27 years no 27 about 23 24 I think it
was before that it was around 2001 I you
don't remember that particular vote
happen before I move to town yeah okay
so that that I'm going way back because
I was here went to the refer yeah yeah
well that's just so we can move on to
the meeting is there any other public
speak just a com you know our best
thoughts for
B is there cover
yeah we're actually going to have a
meeting
I don't think so do we need a motion to
adj public justj it so yeah you should
adj the public hearing I'll make a mo
public4 Ved
thank
you call is approving our minutes from
last week and the week
before
comments I'll make a motion you
makeove
lastek
I'll all in
favor now our next order of business is
discussion and possible action on any of
the
charter revision issues
so would you like to address 304g yeah
I'll make I'll make a motion to amend
304g and strike the and the local of
Education from
local
of just for board board
right that I don't
a I so that was
made creation of
document
I'm so any further discussion on this
okay all in favor
so car I I would like to just talk about
the town clerk just as a side things um
the town clerk is the town clerk's
position in in our community is very
important Carol has done a great job no
one will ever argue Carol has done a
great job but just like we had to move
away from the first select being the
true Chief administrator of the town and
higher a town administrat it's made our
town better and it's made us more
efficient so as we move forward and
Carol um I I don't want to hate you any
more than you engag but as we as we ate
you know we're extremely lucky we're
extremely lucky in our town that we have
someone that runs like Carol but as a as
the first select men you were never that
capable of finding the right candidate
Time After Time After Time After Time
and and things do not improve every time
you get a new person elected into that
into a position so it's it's not
everybody believes it's trying to take
something away it's not trying to take
anything away it's trying to plan for
the future it's trying to make sure that
we have the opportunity to have the
right person in a position it's not
three members of the board of Selectmen
are going to pick a fight with the Town
Clerk and throw the town clerk art it's
trying to get the right person Carol I
totally get where Carol would want to
come from which is you could keep
running forever and win there's not one
doubt within this town that the more
every election you want to run you're
you're going to win absolutely the issue
is the issue is though when she decides
not to when she wants to retire what
happens to the town and and this is what
this is about so everybody understands
that it's what happens to the town so I
I just wanted to De cleare that because
everybody's sitting there saying we're
trying to do something negative to Carol
it's not not about car it's about what
we're doing for the town moving forward
because we need a qualified person in
that position and it's just like what we
did with the town ad
[Music]
Ministry but
care again we come back to the says if
it's not
right I
am this was Adrian's part I'm totally
neutral
okay we
what so you're good you may not believe
totally because of of Dennis's issue
about election and being an elected
position I like I like what's in the
draft okay I think it's okay but I you
know I'm car
on so thank that anything else that was
brought forward to
us at the public
hearing any member would like to
revisit in our proposed
draft so
um one IEM was increasing the board
selection from 5 to
7 that was Jody's
research
to correct it goes I mean me me on that
Bo it goes back to the whole community
and the whole town in having enough
volunteers that are that are qual for
all of
the this started with me saying that I
would have a seven member board but I
would consolidate the board of finance
and the board of Selectmen so that you
have seven volunteers not not what we
currently have which is 12 volunteers
and so this did start with me and my
initial proposal to or that I wanted
them to consider ative commission which
was a Town Council because I feel that
it would be in the best interest of the
community to have um organiz a group
that sits there and has the vision for
the community and also has control of
the finances that's that was we decided
to go against that so now we still have
all of the same number we have 12
potential people we have F and a lot of
the members of the board of Finance Dr
out and you will sit there and see each
cycle you'll have two or three members
of the board of finance that get
replaced
Not Elected but replaced and so the
board of selectman does not have that
necessary that problem really we haven't
had anybody resign since I've been well
we had issues but it was not because of
personal issues it was there are
issues I just don't think I don't think
the I don't I personally don't believe
in seven members of the board of Select
if you're going to have seven members of
the board Finance because now you're
trying to get a bigger pool and we're
having trouble getting where we're going
to be I'm fine with what we
did
okay any other
discussion
no so just going to leave the board of
Select section as
okay all right the other
want St public speaking out of order
urge you to look at the things that Shan
and I noticed as typos or minor R
changes that
yes we'll handle all the
typos like
defition were there any
technical you mve on that we
should or at least talk I mean the
public came people came to ask this
question so the only the town budget
meeting in
April um hopefully that explanation was
good enough with having to bump the
dates up just so that we
have everything on schedule to vote with
the ram budget have one election day vot
on for both RAM and initial budget for
for both initial budgets it may have to
go to a second round depending get but
that's that's also covered in other
parts of the chart but having it another
day costs a lot more money well you just
have to get everybody to come yeah if
you just tell them this is our first
come to vote one time so
section
one8 they felt that that minimum time to
the Charter was a good thing yes the
only other thing is um and duties so
they're feeling there was comment that
powers and duties too much power was
being given to the board of
Select through the legislative Authority
from meetings
to the board of Select and through the
ordinance
process again from my St I'm just going
to just Express
it's the board of Select and
pass and we're not asking we did not
when we put our numbers together we said
50 people it's the same number of people
that would go to a Tong
meeting and if they want to petition
which is only a signature and an
address right on a form they can
petition to say that the ordinance is
not what they want to see happen and
then it pushes it immediately to a
townwide referendum so everybody gets to
to say issue not just the 50 people at
the to meeting saying yes or no it's 50
people hand right they don't have to go
to a meeting they don't have to go
anywhere sign the petition they say they
don't like this ordinance
goes to referendum 2 200 people in
Handover who never all vote but 1,200
people 1200 people 1200 people not 25
1200 people are going to get the ability
to say yes or
no I don't I don't see the town meeting
is a is a good vehicle it allows people
to speak their mind but it is the same
50 people and all the time and this just
spreads out as a city that's all we were
trying to do that's all we were thinking
about to and I think if I heard
correctly it was also concern about
deferring it to the next
referendum or election rather than after
the petition is
presented clearly will maybe just bump
it up so that we have a referendum to a
closer date of that petition that just
goes to special special I I mean when we
put special in front of everything in
our town it gets me because then
everybody's got to sit there and change
their schedule to do different things
but everybody knows there's a May
election everybody and and this is the
other thing in the beginning we I was
just November right and the group sat
there and said don't just do November to
May so we did November and May so it's
six months part if the board of
selectman wants to pass an ordinance and
let's sit there and say they want to try
to do something in December
and a petition comes out and it's
approved it it gets not signatures that
in or that ordinance does not go into
effect until after the May election if
it's approved and if it's not approved
it doesn't go to affect at all so it was
timing and Scott asked a question I know
about 45 days and why we did that that
was done so
that group would have the time to
petition within the 45 days so it cannot
go into effect so the board of Select
passes it at a meeting it has it
actually has 45 days after a mailer sent
out to the community saying that we're
going to do an ordinance we're going the
board of Select when his approved in
ordinance the 45 days starts when
Carol's office receives that mail and
stamps it and then the community has 20
days within that that cycle to petition
so we're giving we what we did as this
group was give as much leeway all of
this as we possibly could so it was 45
days to go into effect 20 days within
that 45 days to petition the clock
starts when Carol's office receives the
letter the mail has to go out
stand and if no petitions happen goes
into effect 45 days which also gives two
Board of Select meetings so somebody
really wants to complain about it and
has a very good opinion and and
reasoning for it and the board of
selectman listens to them they could sit
there and not and vote to not enact that
petition and then it wouldn't go into
effect even if one person came with a
legitimate argument and the border of
Selectmen listened to it a a 3-2 vote
would kill that ordinance because it has
two meetings to go into effect so there
were a lot of things we were attempting
to do to make
I go ahead you're so you're saying it
could be a ref bud referend in May or
the election in November I don't see the
May in
your it says it
in I see the November under it says it
doesn't say may it says any other
because the November election is a state
election legally dentist did it
and turn
here or with the next in four so if you
look at
3014 yeah it says if petition contains
significant ballot go through
this in cooperation with the office of
the Secretary of State stay while
scheduled a special res to conduct it
simultaneously with the election
regularly scheduled held on First
Tuesday after the first Monday of the
month of November
or with the next regularly scheduled
referendum immediately following
validation of sub petition which in
essence means May because it's not a
state election May is not a state
election at the time
referend could
Bud we could potentially change
that was that to D deduce that from this
so I didn't see thank you hey you could
also have more referendums if the budget
fails as we know right so get several
hopefully it won't most of us want the
budget pass unless they're outrageous
anyway I just wanted to respond to
something Scott said before about the 45
days now Scott the time between the
passing of an ordinance right now and
the and it's official you know going
going place is 20 days so we've
increased that to allow for the
position okay right Carol know there you
all okay I just want to make sure
that want to make him
happy me so much not to
I I don't have any I mean I know that
there's differences in opinion but
that's why we vote on things St
referendum I mean it I've said it before
cles to the last
charion I didn't believe in all of the
issues on the last Charter ofion but I
LLY we allowed it push for the referend
we got voted on and it got voted on in
in an appropriate manner I was on the
losing side of that one that's fine you
may be on the losing side of some of
these issues and some people may it's
not appropriate
but that to me is democracy and that
push it forward if it's approved and you
let people vote at referendum and if it
wins it wins and if it loses it loses
and so we're living with a bifurcated
budget but it makes happen people have
to show up to to do their part and and
participate and I believe the people the
group in top that believes in education
has done a better job of getting people
to meetings and don't have any problems
we haven't had a Lia budget ever I just
want to point off one thing that that
last year's referendum on the C
revisions one item failed right so we
had four five item in one thing but it
does it is I think that's democracy I
think it works out that way usually I
know when we have our referendums and
win them there's always one item that
fails and
some you know cuz voters get their
chance and they uh could be two could be
two could be two could be
please could be all but you know if
you've done a good really good job with
the uh then it's don't need once what
that if if if the committee has done a
good job
of bringing it together to sense what
the voters want then there's likely the
only one that doesn't pass yeah well
there'll be there's usually one or two
there controver here and uh they go they
can go either way but the voters get a
chance and it's not just this group it's
not just the board of Select it's
everybody this is the first
stage
so I think that we've covered everything
that was brought out of public speak is
there anything that I
missed you no so okay all
right I just wanted to say that what you
need to do ultimately but before you
stop is you need to vote to approve
the the draft as
amended because there's been an
amendment pass it on to draft submitted
to the bo to the board of Select and you
know in advance of the
deadline and
so actually the person who does that is
work right I'll I'll make a I'll make a
motion that we pass the the draft to be
amended with what we voted on today to
the board of selectman uh in accordance
with our deadline of the
20 second motion
okay any further
discussion okay no all in favor all
right so next order bus public
speed and because I didn't think it
should be a discussion I waited to quick
response to what you said about you know
about getting people out to vote if we
want people to you know participate in
deal with referendum you talk about the
you know petition process but be a lot
better just to put these to referendum
forget town meeting and just say okay
the you know Board of selectum thinks
these These are good things and you know
either our next six months schedule
referendum or it's all our more urgent
Time put referendum that's that's going
to a lot more participation than than
this process um but the other thing I
wanted to note is that you just voted to
push this on even though I think there
are some serious concerns of teog
graphical and more slightly structural
things that you really should
address the
typ typ you can deal with but other
things like you know this thing like is
shouldn't be in
105h um it shouldn't be 105 because it's
not a definition things like that I
don't know if you can change those now
um so the board of selectman obviously
can there there's two different so
there's two different documents one is
the draft that we have to pass on and
one is the charter That We Were Us
utilizing
to to to help ourselves organize
ourselves through this process and that
I believe is what you're referring to
that's what I'm looking at because
that's in the end that's that's what
we're going to have as the
turn with the changes in there but I
just I just wanted you guys to see if
you can look at these things and fix
some of them or if the B of selction can
you know Shannon had two or three I
didn't have and I had that she didn't
have but they're technical things you
know the wording is wrong it's it's
wrong totally wrong or you this doesn't
belong here kind of thing there's one
point I didn't mentioned it when I spoke
before but where you say oh and this is
now got the um the responsibilities of
that section which is you know the board
of selected now has this Authority which
is in the current Charter listed under
the um you know the uh Tom E Authority
so your Charter says now oh this section
um that you're we're going to have later
in the charter is invalid because it's
not here it's really OD
structuring read the not
St yeah all right I will I will yeah I I
se there one reason why I'm here is to
help with that kind of thing if there's
there's anything like that that is uh I
would say relatively cosmetic right
right and and just about about half are
relatively cos okay we will carefully
together carefully review those
relatively cosmetic uh Suggestions by
Scott and by uh chanon and uh and U make
adjustments if
be Patricia
we only have one item
left guess
what I will a motion to adjourn this
wonderful meeting thank you all for
coming oh we have to vote you seconded I
will
second just to say thank
you thank you I was